content/blog/what-is-dscv3.md, before:

---
title: 'What is DSC v3?'
date: '2025-07-14'
author: 'Johan Ljunggren'
excerpt: 'A beginner-friendly introduction to Desired State Configuration version 3 and how to use it across Windows, Linux, and macOS.'
image: 'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1518770660439-4636190af475?w=800&h=600&fit=crop&crop=center'
tags: ['DSC', 'PowerShell', 'Automation', 'Beginners']
readTime: '8 min read'
---

> DSC v3 is a simple, single executable tool that helps you declare and enforce the desired state of your systems in a cross-platform way.

## What is DSC?

Desired State Configuration (DSC) is a PowerShell-based framework that lets you describe how you want your system to look and behave. You write a configuration script (.ps1) that outlines the desired state—like which folders should exist or which services should be running—and DSC ensures your machine matches that state.

## Why DSC v3?

- **Single executable**: No Windows service or complex installation. Just download `dsc.exe` and place it in your PATH.
- **Cross-platform**: Runs on PowerShell 7+ on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
- **Side-by-side versions**: Keep multiple DSC engine versions in separate folders for testing or rollbacks.
- **Familiar syntax**: If you know PowerShell, writing configurations feels natural.

## Installing DSC v3

1. Download the latest `dsc.exe` from the [DSC GitHub releases](https://github.com/PowerShell/dsc/releases).
2. Move `dsc.exe` into a folder on your machine (e.g., `C:\dsc` or `~/bin`).
3. Add it to your PATH:

```powershell
# Windows (PowerShell)
$env:PATH += ';C:\dsc'

# Linux/macOS (bash/zsh)
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"
```

4. Verify installation:

```bash
$ dsc --version
DSC Engine version 3.x.x
```

## Quick Start: Create a Folder

Let's create a folder on your system using DSC v3.

1. Create a JSON configuration `folder-config.json` using DSC v3’s schema:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PowerShell/dsc/main/schema/dsc-config.schema.json",
  "version": "3.0.0",
  "nodes": {
    "localhost": {
      "resources": [
        {
          "module": "PSDesiredStateConfiguration",
          "type": "File",
          "name": "ExampleFolder",
          "properties": {
            "DestinationPath": "/tmp/example",
            "Ensure": "Present",
            "Type": "Directory"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

2. Apply the configuration directly:

```bash
$ dsc config apply ./folder-config.json
```

You should now have an `ExampleFolder` directory under `/tmp` (or `C:\Temp\Example` on Windows).

## How It Works

- **configuration** block: Defines a DSC configuration in `folder-config.json`.
- **Node localhost**: Targets your local machine.
- **File resource**: Ensures the specified folder exists.
- **Apply**: `dsc.exe` reads the configuration and enforces the state on your machine.

## Next Steps

- Explore other DSC resources: `Service`, `Package`, `User`, and more.
- Automate software installs and service management.

## Conclusion

DSC v3 redefines Desired State Configuration by packaging the engine into a lightweight, cross-platform executable that fits seamlessly into modern pipelines. Its adapter model ensures compatibility with existing DSC modules while enabling new, platform-neutral resources. Start small, learn the resource syntax, and build up to automating your entire infrastructure.

Happy configuring!

Commit message:

fix: add missing imageAlt and category fields in DSC v3 blog post metadata

content/blog/what-is-dscv3.md, after:

---
title: 'What is DSC v3?'
date: '2025-07-14'
author: 'Johan Ljunggren'
excerpt: 'A beginner-friendly introduction to Desired State Configuration version 3 and how to use it across Windows, Linux, and macOS.'
image: 'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1518770660439-4636190af475?w=800&h=600&fit=crop&crop=center'
imageAlt: 'Developer working on code with multiple monitors showing terminal and configuration files'
tags: ['DSC', 'PowerShell', 'Automation', 'Beginners']
category: 'Automation'
readTime: '8 min read'
---

> DSC v3 is a simple, single executable tool that helps you declare and enforce the desired state of your systems in a cross-platform way.

## What is DSC?

Desired State Configuration (DSC) is a PowerShell-based framework that lets you describe how you want your system to look and behave. You write a configuration script (.ps1) that outlines the desired state—like which folders should exist or which services should be running—and DSC ensures your machine matches that state.

## Why DSC v3?

- **Single executable**: No Windows service or complex installation. Just download `dsc.exe` and place it in your PATH.
- **Cross-platform**: Runs on PowerShell 7+ on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
- **Side-by-side versions**: Keep multiple DSC engine versions in separate folders for testing or rollbacks.
- **Familiar syntax**: If you know PowerShell, writing configurations feels natural.

## Installing DSC v3

1. Download the latest `dsc.exe` from the [DSC GitHub releases](https://github.com/PowerShell/dsc/releases).
2. Move `dsc.exe` into a folder on your machine (e.g., `C:\dsc` or `~/bin`).
3. Add it to your PATH:

```powershell
# Windows (PowerShell)
$env:PATH += ';C:\dsc'

# Linux/macOS (bash/zsh)
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"
```

4. Verify installation:

```bash
$ dsc --version
DSC Engine version 3.x.x
```

## Quick Start: Create a Folder

Let's create a folder on your system using DSC v3.

1. Create a JSON configuration `folder-config.json` using DSC v3’s schema:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PowerShell/dsc/main/schema/dsc-config.schema.json",
  "version": "3.0.0",
  "nodes": {
    "localhost": {
      "resources": [
        {
          "module": "PSDesiredStateConfiguration",
          "type": "File",
          "name": "ExampleFolder",
          "properties": {
            "DestinationPath": "/tmp/example",
            "Ensure": "Present",
            "Type": "Directory"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

2. Apply the configuration directly:

```bash
$ dsc config apply ./folder-config.json
```

You should now have an `ExampleFolder` directory under `/tmp` (or `C:\Temp\Example` on Windows).

## How It Works

- **configuration** block: Defines a DSC configuration in `folder-config.json`.
- **Node localhost**: Targets your local machine.
- **File resource**: Ensures the specified folder exists.
- **Apply**: `dsc.exe` reads the configuration and enforces the state on your machine.

## Next Steps

- Explore other DSC resources: `Service`, `Package`, `User`, and more.
- Automate software installs and service management.

## Conclusion

DSC v3 redefines Desired State Configuration by packaging the engine into a lightweight, cross-platform executable that fits seamlessly into modern pipelines. Its adapter model ensures compatibility with existing DSC modules while enabling new, platform-neutral resources. Start small, learn the resource syntax, and build up to automating your entire infrastructure.

Happy configuring!
