tests/integration/homepage.md, before:

# Homepage Integration Tests

> Test flow documentation for [`homepage.spec.ts`](homepage.spec.ts)

These tests validate the homepage. They verify SSR behavior, SEO metadata, section content, navigation, and locale support.

---

## Key Architecture

| Aspect            | Before (client)                         | After (server component)                        |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| Page directive    | `'use client'`                          | Server component (no directive)                 |
| Fade-in animation | `motion.main` (Framer Motion)           | CSS `animate-fade-in` class                     |
| Page `<title>`    | Root fallback only (English hardcoded)  | `generateMetadata` with localized hero title    |
| Initial render    | Empty shell until JS loads and hydrates | Full HTML with all section content              |
| Child components  | All `'use client'` (unchanged)          | All `'use client'` (unchanged — client islands) |

---

## Overview — Test Coverage Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Navigate to /] --> B{Content Visible?}
    B -- Yes --> C[✓ SSR verified — hero text in HTML]
    B -- No --> X[✗ Regression to client-only rendering]
    C --> D{Page title correct?}
    D -- Yes --> E[✓ generateMetadata working]
    D -- No --> Y[✗ Metadata not exported]
    E --> F[Header Navigation Tests]
    F --> F1[Logo and nav links visible]
    F --> F2[Blog link navigates to /blog]
    F1 --> G[Hero Section Tests]
    F2 --> G
    G --> G1[Badge and stats visible]
    G --> G2[Learn More button visible]
    G --> G3[Image carousel displays]
    G1 --> H[About Section Tests]
    G2 --> H
    G3 --> H
    H --> H1[Heading and description visible]
    H --> H2[Value cards rendered]
    H --> H3[Hash anchor scrolls to section]
    H1 --> I[Open Source Section Tests]
    H2 --> I
    H3 --> I
    I --> I1[Heading and stats visible]
    I --> I2[Three project cards with links]
    I --> I3[CTA with GitHub and community links]
    I1 --> J[Footer Tests]
    I2 --> J
    I3 --> J
    J --> J1[Company, resource, and support links]
    J --> J2[Copyright notice]
    J --> J3[Social media links]
    J1 --> K[Locale Tests]
    J2 --> K
    J3 --> K
    K --> K1[/sv shows Swedish hero text]
    K --> K2[Swedish metadata in title and OG tags]
    K --> K3[Swedish navigation links]
    K --> K4[Swedish About section]
    K --> K5[Swedish footer]
```

---

## Test Setup

No `beforeEach` hook is needed — each test navigates to the homepage independently. The page is server-rendered, so content is available immediately without clearing any client-side state.

---

## Test Cases

### Server-Side Rendering

#### should render homepage with hero content visible immediately

**Purpose:** Confirms the page is server-rendered with hero content in the initial HTML, not hidden behind a JavaScript loading state.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the hero `<h1>` contains "Streamline Your", "Development", and "Workflow".
3. Assert the hero description containing "Professional consulting services" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant S as Server

    B->>S: GET /
    S->>S: generateMetadata (hero namespace)
    S-->>B: Full HTML with hero + all sections
    Note over B: ✓ h1 "Streamline Your Development Workflow" visible
    Note over B: ✓ Hero description visible
```

#### should have correct page title from generateMetadata

**Purpose:** Verifies `generateMetadata` produces a homepage-specific `<title>` tag instead of the root fallback.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `document.title`.
3. Assert it contains "Streamline Your", "Development", "Workflow", and "Viscalyx".

#### should have meta description

**Purpose:** Confirms the page has a meta description for SEO from `generateMetadata`.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `<meta name="description">` content attribute.
3. Assert it contains "consulting" and is a non-empty string (>20 chars).

#### should have Open Graph metadata

**Purpose:** Verifies Open Graph tags are set for social sharing — title and locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `<meta property="og:title">` content attribute.
3. Assert it contains "Development".
4. Read `<meta property="og:locale">` content attribute.
5. Assert it equals `en_US`.

---

### Header Navigation

#### should display header with logo and navigation links

**Purpose:** Validates the header renders with the company logo and all primary navigation links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the "Viscalyx" logo link is visible.
3. Assert "About", "Open Source", and "Blog" nav links are visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant H as Header

    B->>H: Page loads
    Note over H: ✓ Logo "Viscalyx" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "About" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "Open Source" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "Blog" link visible
```

#### should navigate to blog page when Blog link is clicked

**Purpose:** Confirms the Blog nav link navigates to the blog listing page.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Click the "Blog" link.
3. Assert URL matches `/blog`.

---

### Hero Section

#### should display hero badge and stats

**Purpose:** Validates the hero badge and the three statistics are rendered.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert "Automation & DevOps Excellence" badge is visible.
3. Assert stats: "30+" / "Years Experience", "100+" / "Tasks Automated" are visible.

#### should display Learn More button that scrolls to About

**Purpose:** Confirms the Learn More CTA button is present.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the "Learn More" button is visible.

#### should display hero image carousel

**Purpose:** Validates at least one hero image renders in the carousel.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Locate images in the first `<section>`.
3. Assert at least one image is present.

---

### About Section

#### should display About section with heading and description

**Purpose:** Validates the About section renders with badge, heading, and description text.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert "About Viscalyx" badge is visible.
3. Assert heading "Empowering Organizations Through" is visible.
4. Assert description containing "specialized consulting company" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant A as About Section

    B->>A: Scroll into view
    Note over A: ✓ Badge "About Viscalyx" visible
    Note over A: ✓ h2 "Empowering Organizations Through Smart Automation" visible
    Note over A: ✓ Description text visible
```

#### should display value cards

**Purpose:** Validates all four value proposition cards render with their headings.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert headings: "Precision & Excellence", "Client-Centric Approach", "Innovation First", "Open Source Commitment".

#### should be scrollable via hash anchor

**Purpose:** Confirms navigating to `/#about` makes the About section visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/#about`.
2. Assert the `#about` element is visible.

---

### Open Source Section

#### should display Open Source section with heading and stats

**Purpose:** Validates the Open Source section renders with heading and key statistics.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert an "Open Source" heading is visible.
3. Assert stats "80+" and "9k+" are visible.

#### should display project cards with links

**Purpose:** Confirms all three open source project cards render with names and "View Project" links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert project headings: "PowerShell DSC Community", "DSC Resource Kit", "Sampler".
3. Assert three "View Project" links exist.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant OS as Open Source Section

    B->>OS: Scroll into view
    Note over OS: ✓ "PowerShell DSC Community" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ "DSC Resource Kit" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ "Sampler" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ 3 "View Project" links present
```

#### should display CTA with GitHub and community links

**Purpose:** Validates the call-to-action block with "Follow on GitHub" and "Collaborate With Community" links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert heading "Join the PowerShell Open Source Community" is visible.
3. Assert "Follow on GitHub" and "Collaborate With Community" links are visible.

#### should be scrollable via hash anchor

**Purpose:** Confirms navigating to `/#open-source` makes the Open Source section visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/#open-source`.
2. Assert the `#open-source` element is visible.

---

### Footer

#### should display footer with company info and links

**Purpose:** Validates the footer renders with all navigation columns (Company, Resources, Support).

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert footer is visible.
3. Assert Company links: "About Us", "Open Source".
4. Assert Resource links: "Blog", "Community".
5. Assert Support links: "Privacy Policy", "Terms of Service", "Cookie Policy".

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant F as Footer

    B->>F: Scroll to bottom
    Note over F: ✓ Company: "About Us", "Open Source"
    Note over F: ✓ Resources: "Blog", "Community"
    Note over F: ✓ Support: "Privacy Policy", "Terms of Service", "Cookie Policy"
```

#### should display copyright notice

**Purpose:** Confirms the copyright text with current year is visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert text matching `© {year} Viscalyx. All rights reserved` is visible.

#### should have social media links

**Purpose:** Validates GitHub and LinkedIn social links are present in the footer.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert GitHub and LinkedIn links are visible within the footer.

---

### Locale Support

#### should render homepage in Swedish at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms the Swedish locale renders translated hero content.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert hero `<h1>` contains "Effektivisera Ditt", "Utvecklings", "Arbetsflöde".
3. Assert Swedish badge "Automation & DevOps Excellens" is visible.
4. Assert Swedish button "Läs Mer" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant S as Server

    B->>S: GET /sv
    S->>S: getTranslations({ locale: 'sv', namespace: 'hero' })
    S-->>B: HTML with Swedish content
    Note over B: ✓ h1 "Effektivisera Ditt Utvecklings Arbetsflöde"
    Note over B: ✓ Badge "Automation & DevOps Excellens"
    Note over B: ✓ Button "Läs Mer"
```

#### should have Swedish metadata at /sv

**Purpose:** Verifies `generateMetadata` produces Swedish `<title>` and `og:locale` for the Swedish locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Read `document.title` — assert it contains "Effektivisera".
3. Read `<meta property="og:locale">` — assert it equals `sv_SE`.

#### should display Swedish navigation at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms translated navigation links render for the Swedish locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert nav links: "Om oss", "Öppen Källkod", "Blogg".

#### should display Swedish About section at /sv

**Purpose:** Validates the About section renders with Swedish badge and heading.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert "Om Viscalyx" badge is visible.
3. Assert heading "Ger Organisationer Kraft Genom" is visible.

#### should display Swedish footer at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms the footer renders with Swedish support links and copyright.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert footer links: "Integritetspolicy", "Användarvillkor".
3. Assert "Alla rättigheter förbehållna" text is visible.

Commit message:

Refactor error handling tests for blog post and homepage; enhance assertions for 404 visibility and link types

tests/integration/homepage.md, after:

# Homepage Integration Tests

> Test flow documentation for [`homepage.spec.ts`](homepage.spec.ts)

These tests validate the homepage. They verify SSR behavior, SEO metadata, section content, navigation, and locale support.

---

## Key Architecture

| Aspect            | Before (client)                         | After (server component)                        |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| Page directive    | `'use client'`                          | Server component (no directive)                 |
| Fade-in animation | `motion.main` (Framer Motion)           | CSS `animate-fade-in` class                     |
| Page `<title>`    | Root fallback only (English hardcoded)  | `generateMetadata` with localized hero title    |
| Initial render    | Empty shell until JS loads and hydrates | Full HTML with all section content              |
| Child components  | All `'use client'` (unchanged)          | All `'use client'` (unchanged — client islands) |

---

## Overview — Test Coverage Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Navigate to /] --> B{Content Visible?}
    B -- Yes --> C[✓ SSR verified — hero text in HTML]
    B -- No --> X[✗ Regression to client-only rendering]
    C --> D{Page title correct?}
    D -- Yes --> E[✓ generateMetadata working]
    D -- No --> Y[✗ Metadata not exported]
    E --> F[Header Navigation Tests]
    F --> F1[Logo and nav links visible]
    F --> F2[Blog link navigates to /blog]
    F1 --> G[Hero Section Tests]
    F2 --> G
    G --> G1[Badge and stats visible]
    G --> G2[Learn More button visible]
    G --> G3[Image carousel displays]
    G1 --> H[About Section Tests]
    G2 --> H
    G3 --> H
    H --> H1[Heading and description visible]
    H --> H2[Value cards rendered]
    H --> H3[Hash anchor scrolls to section]
    H1 --> I[Open Source Section Tests]
    H2 --> I
    H3 --> I
    I --> I1[Heading and stats visible]
    I --> I2[Three project cards with links]
    I --> I3[CTA with GitHub and community links]
    I1 --> J[Footer Tests]
    I2 --> J
    I3 --> J
    J --> J1[Company, resource, and support links]
    J --> J2[Copyright notice]
    J --> J3[Social media links]
    J1 --> K[Locale Tests]
    J2 --> K
    J3 --> K
    K --> K1[/sv shows Swedish hero text]
    K --> K2[Swedish metadata in title and OG tags]
    K --> K3[Swedish navigation links]
    K --> K4[Swedish About section]
    K --> K5[Swedish footer]
```

---

## Test Setup

No `beforeEach` hook is needed — each test navigates to the homepage independently. The page is server-rendered, so content is available immediately without clearing any client-side state.

---

## Test Cases

### Server-Side Rendering

#### should render homepage with hero content visible immediately

**Purpose:** Confirms the page is server-rendered with hero content in the initial HTML, not hidden behind a JavaScript loading state.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the hero `<h1>` contains "Streamline Your", "Development", and "Workflow".
3. Assert the hero description containing "Professional consulting services" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant S as Server

    B->>S: GET /
    S->>S: generateMetadata (hero namespace)
    S-->>B: Full HTML with hero + all sections
    Note over B: ✓ h1 "Streamline Your Development Workflow" visible
    Note over B: ✓ Hero description visible
```

#### should have correct page title from generateMetadata

**Purpose:** Verifies `generateMetadata` produces a homepage-specific `<title>` tag instead of the root fallback.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `document.title`.
3. Assert it contains "Streamline Your", "Development", "Workflow", and "Viscalyx".

#### should have meta description

**Purpose:** Confirms the page has a meta description for SEO from `generateMetadata`.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `<meta name="description">` content attribute.
3. Assert it contains "consulting" and is a non-empty string (>20 chars).

#### should have Open Graph metadata

**Purpose:** Verifies Open Graph tags are set for social sharing — title and locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Read `<meta property="og:title">` content attribute.
3. Assert it contains "Development".
4. Read `<meta property="og:locale">` content attribute.
5. Assert it equals `en_US`.

---

### Header Navigation

#### should display header with logo and navigation links

**Purpose:** Validates the header renders with the company logo and all primary navigation links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the "Viscalyx" logo link is visible.
3. Assert "About", "Open Source", and "Blog" nav links are visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant H as Header

    B->>H: Page loads
    Note over H: ✓ Logo "Viscalyx" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "About" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "Open Source" link visible
    Note over H: ✓ "Blog" link visible
```

#### should navigate to blog page when Blog link is clicked

**Purpose:** Confirms the Blog nav link navigates to the blog listing page.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Click the "Blog" link.
3. Assert URL matches `/blog`.

---

### Hero Section

#### should display hero badge and stats

**Purpose:** Validates the hero badge and the three statistics are rendered.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert "Automation & DevOps Excellence" badge is visible.
3. Assert stats: "30+" / "Years Experience", "100+" / "Tasks Automated" are visible.

#### should display Learn More button that scrolls to About

**Purpose:** Confirms the Learn More CTA button is present.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert the "Learn More" button is visible.

#### should display hero image carousel

**Purpose:** Validates at least one hero image renders in the carousel.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Locate images in the first `<section>`.
3. Assert at least one image is present.

---

### About Section

#### should display About section with heading and description

**Purpose:** Validates the About section renders with badge, heading, and description text.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert "About Viscalyx" badge is visible.
3. Assert heading "Empowering Organizations Through" is visible.
4. Assert description containing "specialized consulting company" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant A as About Section

    B->>A: Scroll into view
    Note over A: ✓ Badge "About Viscalyx" visible
    Note over A: ✓ h2 "Empowering Organizations Through Smart Automation" visible
    Note over A: ✓ Description text visible
```

#### should display value cards

**Purpose:** Validates all four value proposition cards render with their headings.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert headings: "Precision & Excellence", "Client-Centric Approach", "Innovation First", "Open Source Commitment".

#### should be scrollable via hash anchor

**Purpose:** Confirms navigating to `/#about` makes the About section visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/#about`.
2. Assert the `#about` element is visible.

---

### Open Source Section

#### should display Open Source section with heading and stats

**Purpose:** Validates the Open Source section renders with heading and key statistics.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert an "Open Source" heading is visible.
3. Assert stats "80+" and "9k+" are visible.

#### should display project cards with links

**Purpose:** Confirms all three open source project cards render with names and "View Project" links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert project headings: "PowerShell DSC Community", "DSC Resource Kit", "Sampler".
3. Assert three "View Project" links exist.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant OS as Open Source Section

    B->>OS: Scroll into view
    Note over OS: ✓ "PowerShell DSC Community" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ "DSC Resource Kit" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ "Sampler" card visible
    Note over OS: ✓ 3 "View Project" links present
```

#### should display CTA with GitHub and community links

**Purpose:** Validates the call-to-action block with "Follow on GitHub" and "Collaborate With Community" links.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert heading "Join the PowerShell Open Source Community" is visible.
3. Assert "Follow on GitHub" and "Collaborate With Community" links are visible.

#### should be scrollable via hash anchor

**Purpose:** Confirms navigating to `/#open-source` makes the Open Source section visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/#open-source`.
2. Assert the `#open-source` element is visible.

---

### Footer

#### should display footer with company info and links

**Purpose:** Validates the footer renders with all navigation columns (Company, Resources, Support) and asserts the correct element types for each link category.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert footer is visible.
3. Assert Company links "About Us" and "Open Source" are rendered as Next.js `<Link>` components with `onClick` handlers (client-side navigation).
4. Assert Resource links: "Blog" is an internal `<a>` tag; "Community" is an external `<a>` tag — both standard anchor elements.
5. Assert Support links: "Privacy Policy", "Terms of Service", "Cookie Policy".

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant F as Footer

    B->>F: Scroll to bottom
    Note over F: Company (Link + onClick handler)
    Note over F: ✓ <Link onClick={handler}> "About Us"
    Note over F: ✓ <Link onClick={handler}> "Open Source"
    Note over F: Resources (anchor tags)
    Note over F: ✓ <a href="/blog"> "Blog" (internal)
    Note over F: ✓ <a href="…" target="_blank"> "Community" (external)
    Note over F: Support
    Note over F: ✓ "Privacy Policy", "Terms of Service", "Cookie Policy"
```

#### should display copyright notice

**Purpose:** Confirms the copyright text with current year is visible.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert text matching `© {year} Viscalyx. All rights reserved` is visible.

#### should have social media links

**Purpose:** Validates GitHub and LinkedIn social links are present in the footer.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/`.
2. Assert GitHub and LinkedIn links are visible within the footer.

---

### Locale Support

#### should render homepage in Swedish at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms the Swedish locale renders translated hero content.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert hero `<h1>` contains "Effektivisera Ditt", "Utvecklings", "Arbetsflöde".
3. Assert Swedish badge "Automation & DevOps Excellens" is visible.
4. Assert Swedish button "Läs Mer" is visible.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant B as Browser
    participant S as Server

    B->>S: GET /sv
    S->>S: getTranslations({ locale: 'sv', namespace: 'hero' })
    S-->>B: HTML with Swedish content
    Note over B: ✓ h1 "Effektivisera Ditt Utvecklings Arbetsflöde"
    Note over B: ✓ Badge "Automation & DevOps Excellens"
    Note over B: ✓ Button "Läs Mer"
```

#### should have Swedish metadata at /sv

**Purpose:** Verifies `generateMetadata` produces Swedish `<title>` and `og:locale` for the Swedish locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Read `document.title` — assert it contains "Effektivisera".
3. Read `<meta property="og:locale">` — assert it equals `sv_SE`.

#### should display Swedish navigation at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms translated navigation links render for the Swedish locale.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert nav links: "Om oss", "Öppen Källkod", "Blogg".

#### should display Swedish About section at /sv

**Purpose:** Validates the About section renders with Swedish badge and heading.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert "Om Viscalyx" badge is visible.
3. Assert heading "Ger Organisationer Kraft Genom" is visible.

#### should display Swedish footer at /sv

**Purpose:** Confirms the footer renders with Swedish support links and copyright.

**Steps:**

1. Navigate to `/sv`.
2. Assert footer links: "Integritetspolicy", "Användarvillkor".
3. Assert "Alla rättigheter förbehållna" text is visible.
